Gh-364: New getting started guide (#370)
gchq/gaffer-doc: docs/getting-started/basics.md

## What is Gaffer?

Gaffer is a graph database framework, it acts similarly to an interface providing a graph data
structure on top of a chosen storage technology to enable storage of large graphs and traversal of
its nodes and edges. In a nutshell Gaffer allows you to take data, convert it into a graph, store it
in a database and then run queries and analytics on it.

The high level interactions of loading data and querying are demonstrated in the diagrams below.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    subgraph Graph Query
        E((User)) --> F
        G{{Schema}} --> F
        F([Query]) ---> H(Gaffer)
        J(key-value store) <--> H
        H --> K([Result])
    end
    subgraph Data Input
        A(Data)-->B{{Schema}}
        B --> C(Gaffer)
        C --> D(key-value store)
    end
```

## Gaffer Schemas

One of the main differences between Gaffer and other graph database tools are its schemas. In Gaffer
JSON based schemas need to be written upfront for it to understand how to load and treat the data in
the graph. These schemas define all aspects of the nodes and edges in the graph, and can even be
used to automatically do basic analysis or aggregation on queries and ingested data.

> You can kind of think of the schema as sort of a filter or validator for the incoming data as, a

Reviewer: you don't need the comma after as,

> given bit of data must conform with part of the schema or it will simply be ingored as it doesn't

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
given bit of data must conform with part of the schema or it will simply be ignored as it doesn't
```

fit the structure of the graph.

### Elements Schema

All distinct bits of data in a Gaffer graph (e.g. nodes and edges) are refered to as 'elements'. The
structure and properties of these graph elements are defined in the elements schema. The general
format of an element schema are two lists; one of the `"edges"` and the other of the `"entities"`
like the following:

!!! example "Basic elements syntax"

    ```json
    {
        "edges": {
            "Edge": {
                "source": "type",
                "destination": "type",
                "directed": "true",
                "properties": {
                    "property": "type"
                }
            }
        },
        "entities": {
            "Node": {
                "description": "A Node",
                "vertex": "type",
                "properties": {
                    "property": "type"
                }
            }
        }
    }
    ```

As you can see there are a few fields for both the example `"Edge"` and `"Node"`, many of these

> require a type as their value (discussed in the [next section](#types-schema)) which, are

Reviewer: another unnecessary comma after which

essentially handlers or object types for the value associated with the field.

> For an `edge` the following fields are required.

Reviewer: should be a : at the end of this sentence

- `source` - A user defined type for the source node the edge originated from.

> - `directed` - Boolean true or false (this is still needs to be user defined in the types schema) to

Reviewer: explanation of `directed` is a bit confusing and unclear, especially the bit in brackets, could do with just reading over

    define if the edge is directed or not. When an Edge is undirected in Gaffer, it is treated as if
    the relationship was bidirectional and the vertices of the edge do not have an authoritative
    source and destination.

- `destination` - A user defined type for the destination node the edge goes to.

> For an entity only one field is actually required outlined, vertex (see below). The example does

Reviewer: This first sentence about entities is a bit jumbled and just needs re-writing :)

however include some of the common optional fields too such as a `"properties"` list and
`"description"`.

> - `vertex` - A user defined type for the node/vertex

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `vertex` - A user defined type for the node/vertex.
```

### Types Schema

Following on from the elements schema, the other necessary schema needed for a Gaffer deployment is
the types schema.  The types schema allows user defined types for all elements in the graph. It can
also demonstrate the power of Gaffer as it allows for custom functions classes to be used on the
types; however, this can make it quite complex to write a full schema for a graph.

!!! example "Example types syntax"

    ```json
    {
        "types": {
            "type.string": {
                "description": "A basic type to hold the string value of an element",
                "class": "java.lang.String"
            },
            "type.int": {
                "description": "A basic type to hold the int value of an element",
                "class": "java.lang.Integer"
            }
        }
    }
    ```

## The Rest API

Most of the interaction with a deployed Gaffer graph will be through the rest API. When deployed,

> the rest API will be available at defined address, accessing this address via a browser brings up a

Reviewer: think you are trying to say the 'rest API will be available at a defined address', might want to just re-phrase this bit

[Swagger UI](https://swagger.io/) with various GET and POST requests predefined for you to start

> using. Most of the GET requests simply retrieve information about the graph so can be useful to

Reviewer: missing the word it after 'graph so'

ensure your config files have been loaded correctly and the graph is operating normally. The POST
requests allow you to interact with the graph by loading data and running queries.

The main POST request you will use in the API is `/graph/operations/execute`, this will ingest raw
JSON to carry out operations on the Gaffer graph. Gaffer provides many pre built operations that are

> available to use and can be chained togther for more complex use cases. However, be aware that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
available to use and can be chained together for more complex use cases. However, be aware that
```

# Gaffer Basics

## What is Gaffer?

Gaffer is a graph database framework, it acts similarly to an interface providing a graph data
structure on top of a chosen storage technology to enable storage of large graphs and traversal of

> its nodes and edges. In a nutshell Gaffer allows you to take data, convert it into a graph, store it

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
structure on top of a chosen storage technology to enable storage of large graphs and traversal of
their nodes and edges. In a nutshell Gaffer allows you to take data, convert it into a graph, store it
```

- `destination` - A user defined type for the destination node the edge goes to.

For an `entity` only one field is required:

- `vertex` - A user defined type for the node/vertex.

!!! note ""
    The example includes some of the common optional fields too such as a `"properties"` list and
    `"description"`.

### Types Schema

Following on from the elements schema, the other necessary schema needed for a Gaffer deployment is
the types schema.  The types schema allows user defined types for all elements in the graph. It can
also demonstrate the power of Gaffer as it allows for custom functions classes to be used on the
types; however, this can make it quite complex to write a full schema for a graph.

!!! example "Example types syntax"

    ```json
    {
        "types": {
            "type.string": {
                "description": "A basic type to hold the string value of an element",
                "class": "java.lang.String"
            },
            "type.int": {
                "description": "A basic type to hold the int value of an element",
                "class": "java.lang.Integer"
            }
        }
    }
    ```

## The Rest API

> Most of the interaction with a deployed Gaffer graph will be through the rest API. When deployed,

Reviewer 3: If not mentioned elsewhere, it might be good to add a sentence on the Python API being used instead of directly accessing the REST. Also should be mentioned that interaction can be done through Java.

the rest API will be available at a configurable address, accessing this address via a browser
brings up a [Swagger UI](https://swagger.io/) with various GET and POST requests predefined for you
to start using.

> Most of the GET requests simply retrieve information about the graph so it can be useful to ensure

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Most of the GET requests simply retrieve information about the graph which can be useful to ensure
```
